
# 序列化反序列化

> 将一个对象编码成一个字节流，称将该对象序列化(serializing)；相反的处理过程称作反序列化(deserializing)。序列化化之后的对象可以进行网络传输以及持久化到磁盘上。

## 谨慎实现 Serializable 接口

1. 实现 Serializable接口最大的代价是，一旦一个类被发布，就大大降低了改变这个类实现的灵活性。（effective java 74）如果接受了默认的序列化形式，并且以后又要改变这个类的内部表示法，结果可能导致序列化形式的不兼容，它会使类的演变收到限制。限制的一个例子与 流的唯一标识符有关，通常也被称为序列化版本 UID(serial version UID).如果你没有显式的指定UID，系统会经过一个复杂的计算过程算出一个类，但是今后如果增加一个方法，那么这个UID也会发生变化。这样就会导致版本不兼容，运行时导致 InvalidClassException 异常。

2. 增加Bug 和安全漏洞的可能性。 一般情况下，对象是利用构造器创建的；序列化机制是一种语言之外的对象创建机制，很难受到 由真正的构造器创建出来的对象 之间关系的约束，可能会导致类的内部信息被非法的访问。

3. 增加了兼容性测试的难度

## 实现 Serializable 接口需要权衡

1. 比如 Date和 BigInteger 这样的值类就应该实现 Serializable，大多数的集合也是如此；代表活动实体的类，比如线程池，一般不应该实现 Serializable。

2. 为了继承而设计的类应该尽可能少的去实现 Serializable ，用户的接口也尽可能少的继承 Serializable接口。

3. 一个专门为了继承而设计的类是不可序列化的，就不可能编写出可序列化的子类。特别是，如果超类没有提供可访问的无参构造器，子类也不可能做到可序列化。
4. 内部类不能实现，设计到外部引用相关的问题。静态成员类可以。

# Protocol Buffers

> Protocol buffers are Google's language-neutral, platform-neutral, extensible mechanism for serializing structured data – think XML, but smaller, faster, and simpler. You define how you want your data to be structured once, then you can use special generated source code to easily write and read your structured data to and from a variety of data streams and using a variety of languages. [from](https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers)

## [Why Use Protocol Buffers?](https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers/docs/javatutorial)

The example we're going to use is a very simple "address book" application that can read and write people's contact details to and from a file. Each person in the address book has a name, an ID, an email address, and a contact phone number.

How do you serialize and retrieve structured data like this? There are a few ways to solve this problem:

- Use Java Serialization. This is the default approach since it's built into the language, but it has a host of well-known problems (see Effective Java, by Josh Bloch pp. 213), and also doesn't work very well if you need to share data with applications written in C++ or Python.
- You can invent an ad-hoc way to encode the data items into a single string – such as encoding 4 ints as "12:3:-23:67". This is a simple and flexible approach, although it does require writing one-off encoding and parsing code, and the parsing imposes a small run-time cost. This works best for encoding very simple data.
- Serialize the data to XML. This approach can be very attractive since XML is (sort of) human readable and there are binding libraries for lots of languages. This can be a good choice if you want to share data with other applications/projects. However, XML is notoriously space intensive, and encoding/decoding it can impose a huge performance penalty on applications. Also, navigating an XML DOM tree is considerably more complicated than navigating simple fields in a class normally would be.


Protocol buffers are the flexible, efficient, automated solution to solve exactly this problem. With protocol buffers, you write a .proto description of the data structure you wish to store. From that, the protocol buffer compiler creates a class that implements automatic encoding and parsing of the protocol buffer data with an efficient binary format. The generated class provides getters and setters for the fields that make up a protocol buffer and takes care of the details of reading and writing the protocol buffer as a unit. Importantly, the protocol buffer format supports the idea of extending the format over time in such a way that the code can still read data encoded with the old format.

## Defining Your Protocol Format

To create your address book application, you'll need to start with a .proto file. The definitions in a .proto file are simple: you add a message for each data structure you want to serialize, then specify a name and a type for each field in the message. Here is the .proto file that defines your messages, addressbook.proto.

```
syntax = "proto2";

package tutorial;

option java_package = "com.example.tutorial";
option java_outer_classname = "AddressBookProtos";

message Person {
  required string name = 1;
  required int32 id = 2;
  optional string email = 3;

  enum PhoneType {
    MOBILE = 0;
    HOME = 1;
    WORK = 2;
  }

  message PhoneNumber {
    required string number = 1;
    optional PhoneType type = 2 [default = HOME];
  }

  repeated PhoneNumber phones = 4;
}

message AddressBook {
  repeated Person people = 1;
}
```

As you can see, the syntax is similar to C++ or Java. Let's go through each part of the file and see what it does.

The .proto file starts with a package declaration, which helps to prevent naming conflicts between different projects. In Java, the package name is used as the Java package unless you have explicitly specified a java_package, as we have here. Even if you do provide a java_package, you should still define a normal package as well to avoid name collisions in the Protocol Buffers name space as well as in non-Java languages.

After the package declaration, you can see two options that are Java-specific: java_package and java_outer_classname. java_package specifies in what Java package name your generated classes should live. If you don't specify this explicitly, it simply matches the package name given by the package declaration, but these names usually aren't appropriate Java package names (since they usually don't start with a domain name). The java_outer_classname option defines the class name which should contain all of the classes in this file. If you don't give a java_outer_classname explicitly, it will be generated by converting the file name to camel case. For example, "my_proto.proto" would, by default, use "MyProto" as the outer class name.

Next, you have your message definitions. A message is just an aggregate containing a set of typed fields. Many standard simple data types are available as field types, including bool, int32, float, double, and string. You can also add further structure to your messages by using other message types as field types – in the above example the Person message contains PhoneNumber messages, while the AddressBook message contains Person messages. You can even define message types nested inside other messages – as you can see, the PhoneNumber type is defined inside Person. You can also define enum types if you want one of your fields to have one of a predefined list of values – here you want to specify that a phone number can be one of MOBILE, HOME, or WORK.

The " = 1", " = 2" markers on each element identify the unique "tag" that field uses in the binary encoding. Tag numbers 1-15 require one less byte to encode than higher numbers, so as an optimization you can decide to use those tags for the commonly used or repeated elements, leaving tags 16 and higher for less-commonly used optional elements. Each element in a repeated field requires re-encoding the tag number, so repeated fields are particularly good candidates for this optimization.

Each field must be annotated with one of the following modifiers:

- required: a value for the field must be provided, otherwise the message will be considered "uninitialized". Trying to build an uninitialized message will throw a RuntimeException. Parsing an uninitialized message will throw an IOException. Other than this, a required field behaves exactly like an optional field.
- optional: the field may or may not be set. If an optional field value isn't set, a default value is used. For simple types, you can specify your own default value, as we've done for the phone number type in the example. Otherwise, a system default is used: zero for numeric types, the empty string for strings, false for bools. For embedded messages, the default value is always the "default instance" or "prototype" of the message, which has none of its fields set. Calling the accessor to get the value of an optional (or required) field which has not been explicitly set always returns that field's default value.
- repeated: the field may be repeated any number of times (including zero). The order of the repeated values will be preserved in the protocol buffer. Think of repeated fields as dynamically sized arrays.

## Compiling Your Protocol Buffers

https://www.jianshu.com/p/b49aceff9da1

Now that you have a .proto, the next thing you need to do is generate the classes you'll need to read and write AddressBook (and hence Person and PhoneNumber) messages. To do this, you need to run the protocol buffer compiler protoc on your .proto:

1. If you haven't installed the compiler, download the package and follow the instructions in the README.
2. Now run the compiler, specifying the source directory (where your application's source code lives – the current directory is used if you don't provide a value), the destination directory (where you want the generated code to go; often the same as $SRC_DIR), and the path to your .proto. In this case, you...:

```dos
protoc -I=$SRC_DIR --java_out=$DST_DIR $SRC_DIR/addressbook.proto
```

This generates com/example/tutorial/AddressBookProtos.java in your specified destination directory.

## Writing A Message

Now let's try using your protocol buffer classes. The first thing you want your address book application to be able to do is write personal details to your address book file. To do this, you need to create and populate instances of your protocol buffer classes and then write them to an output stream.

Here is a program which reads an AddressBook from a file, adds one new Person to it based on user input, and writes the new AddressBook back out to the file again. The parts which directly call or reference code generated by the protocol compiler are highlighted.

```java
package com.example.tutorial;
import com.example.tutorial.AddressBookProtos.AddressBook;
import com.example.tutorial.AddressBookProtos.Person;
import java.io.BufferedReader;
import java.io.FileInputStream;
import java.io.FileNotFoundException;
import java.io.FileOutputStream;
import java.io.InputStreamReader;
import java.io.IOException;
import java.io.PrintStream;

public class AddPerson{
    // This function fills in a Person message based on user input.
    static Person PromptForAddress(BufferedReader stdin,
                                   PrintStream stdout) throws IOException {
        Person.Builder person = Person.newBuilder();

        stdout.print("Enter person ID: ");
        person.setId(Integer.valueOf(stdin.readLine()));

        stdout.print("Enter name: ");
        person.setName(stdin.readLine());

        stdout.print("Enter email address (blank for none): ");
        String email = stdin.readLine();
        if (email.length() > 0) {
            person.setEmail(email);
        }

        while (true) {
            stdout.print("Enter a phone number (or leave blank to finish): ");
            String number = stdin.readLine();
            if (number.length() == 0) {
                break;
            }

            Person.PhoneNumber.Builder phoneNumber =
                    Person.PhoneNumber.newBuilder().setNumber(number);

            stdout.print("Is this a mobile, home, or work phone? ");
            String type = stdin.readLine();
            if (type.equals("mobile")) {
                phoneNumber.setType(Person.PhoneType.MOBILE);
            } else if (type.equals("home")) {
                phoneNumber.setType(Person.PhoneType.HOME);
            } else if (type.equals("work")) {
                phoneNumber.setType(Person.PhoneType.WORK);
            } else {
                stdout.println("Unknown phone type.  Using default.");
            }

            person.addPhones(phoneNumber);
        }

        return person.build();
    }

    // Main function:  Reads the entire address book from a file,
    //   adds one person based on user input, then writes it back out to the same
    //   file.
    public static void main(String[] args) throws Exception {
        if (args.length != 1) {
            System.err.println("Usage:  AddPerson ADDRESS_BOOK_FILE");
            System.exit(-1);
        }

        AddressBook.Builder addressBook = AddressBook.newBuilder();

        // Read the existing address book.
        try {
            addressBook.mergeFrom(new FileInputStream(args[0]));
        } catch (FileNotFoundException e) {
            System.out.println(args[0] + ": File not found.  Creating a new file.");
        }

        // Add an address.
        addressBook.addPeople(
                PromptForAddress(new BufferedReader(new InputStreamReader(System.in)),
                        System.out));

        // Write the new address book back to disk.
        FileOutputStream output = new FileOutputStream(args[0]);
        addressBook.build().writeTo(output);
        output.close();
    }
}
```

```java
package com.example.tutorial;

import com.example.tutorial.AddressBookProtos.AddressBook;
import com.example.tutorial.AddressBookProtos.Person;
import java.io.FileInputStream;
import java.io.IOException;
import java.io.PrintStream;

class ListPeople {
    // Iterates though all people in the AddressBook and prints info about them.
    static void Print(AddressBook addressBook) {
        for (Person person: addressBook.getPeopleList()) {
            System.out.println("Person ID: " + person.getId());
            System.out.println("  Name: " + person.getName());
            if (person.hasEmail()) {
                System.out.println("  E-mail address: " + person.getEmail());
            }

            for (Person.PhoneNumber phoneNumber : person.getPhonesList()) {
                switch (phoneNumber.getType()) {
                    case MOBILE:
                        System.out.print("  Mobile phone #: ");
                        break;
                    case HOME:
                        System.out.print("  Home phone #: ");
                        break;
                    case WORK:
                        System.out.print("  Work phone #: ");
                        break;
                }
                System.out.println(phoneNumber.getNumber());
            }
        }
    }

    // Main function:  Reads the entire address book from a file and prints all
    //   the information inside.
    public static void main(String[] args) throws Exception {
        if (args.length != 1) {
            System.err.println("Usage:  ListPeople ADDRESS_BOOK_FILE");
            System.exit(-1);
        }

        // Read the existing address book.
        AddressBook addressBook =
                AddressBook.parseFrom(new FileInputStream(args[0]));

        Print(addressBook);
    }
}
```

需要配置args $FileDir$\aa.txt,需要建立aa.txt文件

[原文链接](https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers/docs/javatutorial)